---
layout: post
title: "Science Fiction Vs Fantasy - A Comparative Analysis of Genres using In the Year 2889 and Rise of the Guardians"
date: 2013-11-08
---

Science fiction and fantasy as genres rooted in the imagination of the author talk about “there and then”. Both have element of something new and invoke sense of unfamiliarity. Thus, Science Fiction and Fantasy cross over and meet at “cognitive dissonance”.  Though the line between the two is blurry, still the differences between the two exist. These differences are explored in this journal along with the most defining difference through comparative analysis of texts “In the Year 2889” and “Rise of the Guardians”.

“In the Year 2889” is a piece of science fiction involving a realistic extrapolation of possible future science and technology.  Whereas “Rise of Guardians” is a fantastic work involving made-up world with magic and supernatural creatures like Santa Clause, Tooth Fairy etc. Thus the difference between the two lies in the fact that “In the Year 2889” has its roots in the realm of science and thus does a possible speculation of reality, whereas “Rise of the Guardians” is based in totally different world of magic and supra-natural creatures with no base in reality as it goes beyond predictable and probable. Thus the differences in the base and knowledge system bring about the distinction in the language, the tropes and the setting used by the author. At the level of language, novum is explained in “In the Year 2889” through recognisable or familiar scientific language i.e. scientific theory regarding modes of vibrations is established first which lead to invention of marvellous technical instruments like transformer and accumulator. Science fiction tropes and scientific language such as accumulator, transformer, research, mechanical force, aerial navigation, phonotelephote etc. are used in the text now and then. “In the Year 2889” has strong scientific setting, where futuristic world is shown through the regular day in the life of protagonist- Fritz Napoleon Smith, "editor of the Earth Chronicle". Its setting includes the futuristic fictional world ruled by laws that are understandable by human reason through science as knowledge system, and eventually controllable by human effort. Whereas in “Rise of the Guardians”, magic is explained as sheer capability of magical characters. “Rise of Guardians” has setting with entirely different universe where the extra-ordinary events can be explained as being self-coherent in the same world. Fantastic tropes like wings to fly, fantastic characters like Santa Clause, Tooth Fairy and monstrous creatures (Pitch and black horses) are used in the movie. Also like most fantastic text “Rise of the Guardians” involved quest as theme which involves internal quest of Jack Sparrow for self-realisation. It also involves battle, another element central to fantasy, where Guardians fight against pitch to protect the hopes, beliefs and imagination of children all over the world.

The more fundamental difference between the two genres is at the level of origin. Though both have common origin as “Chivalric Romance”, Science fiction has another origin point i.e. “Utopia”. “In the Year 2889” directly relates to utopia as origin of Science fiction whereas “Rise of the Guardians” relates to “Chivalric Romance” as the origin of fantasy. “In the Year 2889” focuses on meticulously detailed future science. It portrays how the advancement of technology has produced sustainable society while making life of humans easier in the field of medicine and communication (evident from the fact that science has invented counter measures for side-effects of hectic schedule and enormous development in telephony) and also increasing productivity by manifold (evident Mr. Smith able to handling multiple task a regular day) thus representing a utopian society. “Rise of the Guardians” is a piece of “Chivalric Romance” as it deals with marvel filled adventure of Jack Frost, portrayed as having heroic qualities, who goes on quest in search of his identity along with battle between good and evil. In Science Fiction, especially the one portraying utopian society, there is always a path from our here-and-now to the milieu of a science-fiction story, which in our case simply involves time passing and plausible advances in science and changes in society taking place during that time. Whereas in a fantastic text like “Rise of the Guardians”, which originates from “Chivalric Romance”, either there is never a path from our here-and-now to the milieu of a fantasy story or path is via fantastic trope like dream: for the simple reason that magic and supra-natural powers do not work in real world. 

Thus due to the difference in the origin, the themes and ideas the two genres evoke are different. Since “In the Year 2889” aims in familiarising the readers with the futuristic science and technology along with implications of the technology on the world, it deals with social issues in “there and then”. It explores ideas like philosophical and social aspects of progress and evolution by exploring and questioning limits of human capabilities and impacts and dependency of technology on individual and society. On the contrary, “Rise of the Guardians” invokes ideas like heroism, hope involving moral and ethical issues.  Good and evil can be thought of as being something inherent to each individual. Good being represented by optimism, cheerfulness (Jack Frost, Santa Claus) and preservation (Tooth Fairy) and Pitch standing for the evil that shows fear, anger, despair and pessimism. 

The differences in the origin also relates to the differences in intended effect. “Rise of the Guardians” has sense of escapism involved with it. “Rise of Guardians” is escapist by nature as it deals with escapism from fear at the plot level and also escape to fulfil the desires into the world of vivid imagination with fairies, Santa Clause and other supra-natural creatures. It does not reflect on the escape from real world as at times we can relate to the Jack Frost and his psychological issues like questioning his existence and becoming part of society. It also deals with moral aspect which can be seen through battle between the good and the evil in the story which portrayed the two emotional aspects which the story presents: good representing happiness and hope which the characters like Santa, Jack Frost and others bring and the evil representing fear and hopelessness which Pitch Black enjoys and feeds upon. “In the Year 2889”, using scientific language and setting, portrays  more familiar or believable society that explicitly recognizes the profound ways in which science and technology, those key products of the human mind, shape our world. “In the Year 2889” also deals with intellectual aspect by describing the invention of transformer and accumulator as new scientific revelation while exploring the issues of social impact of technology and technical dependence of humans.

The differences in the origin also relates to the differences in authorial intentions. Authors of Science Fiction are supposed to look at our world and speculate on how it might change or evolve into something different. Often this speculation involves the possible impact of new technologies while postulating some phenomenon that might work like in the case of “In the Year 2889” where insight into vibrations of solid lead to technical breakthrough. Fantastic authors do not linger on how things work; rather they are supposed to explore world of desires while dealing with moral and ethical issues. In “Rise of the Guardians” one of the main intention of author is sense of unknowability and yet believability through imagination. Author intends to show that imagination never goes away. People fight constantly to suppress their imaginations, to deny the child inside them.  They conform, they live in fear, they become cynical. People tend to believe they know and undermine the power of unknowability and faith which is essential for the existence of aspects of human nature, like optimism and happiness. 
